Celebrated as Maharashtra's cultural capital, Pune houses a plethora of educational institutes, museums and hill forts. Besides being a cultural and educational hub, the city has ample attractions to satiate most visitors. Pune, with its glorious Maratha history and Osho connection, a host of sightseeing attractions, pleasant weather,
and a largely dynamic crowd of students
and young professionals, proves wonderful
for a vacation. The list of not to be missed
attractions is infinite here but a couple of
most interesting hot spots are the
Pataleshwar Rock-cut temple and the
Sinhagad Fort. The temple is dedicated to
martyred Maratha heroes, while the fort is
well for a grand Maratha triumph over
Mughal invaders. Best famous for its its
Osho slippers, Shrewsbury biscuits, and
world-class educational institutes, the city of Pune is no less than a foodie’s paradise with an array of dining options to choose from. Some not to miss restaurants are Exotica, Mi-a-Mi, Cafe Mangii and Marrakesh which offer a complete dining experience to the guests. However, if you ever face dilemma about where to head for satiating your hunger pangs, don’t hesitate in making your way to the famous Koregaon Park, which is like a one-stop solution for all your dining needs.

              Lastly, this is the city where Shivaji Maharaj spent his childhood. This was the capital of the Maratha confederacy at the height of its power — the Peshwas’ Pune. This is where the British defeated the Marathas in 1817, making it their monsoon capital ( Pune being drier than Mumbai), laying grounds for the graceful cantonment of today. This is where Lokmanya Tilak brought out his newspaper and where the British
imprisoned Mahatma Gandhi for two years.

WHAT TO SEE 
1) Shreemant dagdusheth Halwai Ganesh Temple
Shreemant Dagdusheth Halwai
Sarvajanik Ganpati, 250, Budhvar
Peth, Pune, Maharashtra 411002,

Located in close proximity to Shaniwar Wada Fort, it is a must visit if you want to
experience architectural splendour and seek some divine intervention as well. Devoted to Lord Ganesha, the temple comes alive during the 10-day Ganesh Mahotsav festival that is celebrated with much zest and grandeur here. Devotees from all across Maharashtra visit this temple during the festival and pay their respects to Lord. The temple was built by Dagadusheth Halwai in the year 1893. He was a sweet mart seller who went on to become a wealthy businessman and since he was an ardent devotee of Lord Ganesha, he took a great interest in building this beautiful temple.

2) Shaniwar wada Palace 

A prominent historical landmark in Pune is Shaniwarwada which is considered as one of the best pune tourist places. It is a majestic fortification which was built in 1732 and during that time it was the seat of the Peshwas of the Maratha Empire and they ruled over there until 1818. After they lost control to the British East India Company, they could not use it longer. But when they were in the reign, Shaniwarwada was the centre of Indian politics in the 18th century and is one of the famous places to visit in pune with friends.

But in 1828, the fort was destroyed by a huge fire and later the remnants were transformed to become a tourist site. Shaniwarwada was a seven-storied capital building of the Peshwas and they wanted the building to be made of stone alone. However, after the completion of the ground floor, the people of Satara insisted that stone monument can be sanctioned and built only by the Shahu King, not the Peshwas.

With respect to it, the Peshwas were asked to continue the construction of the building by using only bricks. But when the British attacked, only the base floor survived while all the other floors were completely destroyed. Earlier, the fort used to accommodate around thousand people. The major buildings inside the fort are Thora Rayancha Diwankhana or the court reception hall of the eldest royal member, Naachacha Diwankhana which is the dance hall, Juna Arsa Mahal that is the Old Mirror Hall and so on. Since all the buildings were destroyed in the fire, only descriptions of the remaining areas are available currently.

The doorways were made of teak arches with ornamental teardrop teak pillars shaped like Suru trunks. Ceilings were beautified by numerous chandeliers and the floors were filled with polished marble adorned with rich Persian rugs. The walls displayed paintings depicting the Hindu epics. The top floor of the building enacted as the residence of the Peshwa and it was called Meghadambari. Among many Pune places to visit, this palace has it's own value and is a must visit location.

3) National Defense Academy  

NDA is the sophisticated acronym of the National Defence Academy in Pune. It is the joint services academy of the Indian Armed Forces where three sections of the defence field such as the Army, the Navy and the Air Force cadets are trained together before the get pre commissioning training in the respective service academies and it is one of the famous places to visit in Pune city.

The academy is located at Khadakwasla near Pune and it is the first tri service academy in the world. Since its establishment, the cadets from the academy have led and fought in major conflicts in which the Indian Armed Forces has been called to action. 

The alumni of the academy has 3 Param Vir Chakra recipients and 9 Ashoka Chakra recipients. At the end of the World War II, the then Commander in Chief of the Indian Army, Field Marshal Claude Auchinleck, after witnessing the experiences of the army during the war formed a committee to study various military academies in the world and submitted a report to the Government of India in 1946. 

That committee came up with the idea of the establishment of a Joint Services Military Academy. After India got independent, the Chiefs of Staff Committee implemented the recommendations of the Auchinleck report and afterwards, the committee initiated a plan in late 1947 to establish a permanent defence academy. The foundation stone for the construction of the academy was laid in 1949 by the then Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru.

The NDA campus is situated about 17 km south west of Pune city. The administrative headquarters of the NDA, the Sudan Block is named like that in honour of the soldiers of Indian soldiers who lost their lives during the East African Campaign in Sudan. The building is a three storied one made of basalt and granite structure constructed with the famous Jodhpur red sandstone. The exterior design has a blend of arches, pillars and verandahs topped by a dome. There are a number of war relics in the campus along with an extensive library named the Vyas Library that accommodates more than 100000 printed volumes.

4) Sinhagad Fort 

Sinhagad or Kondana is a pride of the southwestern region of Pune. This fort was the one to support Maharashtra during the ancient battles. Sinhagad battle of 1671 is the significant one. Bhuleshwar range of the great Sahyadris is the home to this historical monument.

 The fortress has an elevation of around 1312 m above the sea level. Sinhagad has got its own breakneck slopes to protect it from all sides. 

There are two entrances to this fort – one in the north-eastern region (Pune Darwaza) and another one towards the southeastern part (Kalyan Darwaza). The authenticity and the richness of Sinhagad fortress date back to around 1000 years.

This is evident from the carvings present on the walls of Kaundinya Eshwar temple there. Sinhagad is valued as a true sightseeing heritage.

To begin your sightseeing adventure, you have Rajaram’s tomb which is worth a visit. The fortress displays some of the adorable monoliths of Tanaji Malusare – one of the efficient safe-keepers of the fort from Shivaji Maharaj’s era.

Besides these crucial displays, the fortress has got its own military depot, a Kali temple, breweries, and a Hanuman effigy. 

Pune Darwaza, Kalyan Darwaza, Tilak Bungalow, Hawa Point, Kade Lot, Amruteshwar Temple, Tanaji Samadhi and Memorial raises the elegance of this fortress even today.

 Summiting the fortress offers some stunning views of the Khadakwasla Dam from one end; while from its other side, you can see glimpses of Torna Fort.

5) Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park 

Go for an amazing outing with your friends and family to Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park when you are in the city of Pune. The famous park is known for having a snake park, an animal orphanage and a zoo that makes it totally worth a visit for lovers of wildlife and nature. Whether you are an adult or a kid, a visit to Rajiv Gandhi zoological park is an exciting trip to learn more about snakes and reptiles and come back with more knowledge about these elusive creatures.

Some famous animals which can be spotted here are a white tiger, leopard, blackbucks, elephants, sambhars etc. There is also a 13 ft cobra which gathers the most attention by tourists visiting the snake park inside the Rajiv Gandhi Zoological Park.

6) National War Museum 

Offering an astounding getaway to commemorate the memory of brave Indian soldiers who lost their lives in the line of fire, National War Museum is one of the most amazing Pune tourist places. Engulfed by a blanket of greenery, National War Museum is the only war memorial in South Asia that was built by the contributions of common citizenry.

National War Museum is an interesting visit to appreciate the efforts of citizens in Pune in acknowledging the valour of Indian soldiers. One who visits here can get a chance to get a glimpse of a MiG-23BN which was used in the Kargil war. Another fascinating thing on display here is the replica of INS Trishul which offered its services in the India-Pakistan War of 1971 and Liberation of Goa. National War Museum offers a great trip for students and people interested in Indian defence history.

7) Khadakwasla Dam 

  Khadakwasla Dam is one of the primary visiting places in Pune located at Khadakwasla, the location where the NDA is. The dam is built on the Mutha River, situated about 20 kilometres from Pune city. The dam has created a beautiful lake known as Khadkawasla Lake. The lake is the main source of water for the city and its suburbs. 

The largest lake in the region is Mushi Lake which is located about 50 kilometres away from Khadakwasla. Near the dam, there is the famous National Defence Academy, the Institute of Advanced Technology. Also, there is the popular Sinhagad Fort and the twin dams of Panshet and Varasgaon which supply water for irrigation.

The Khadakwasla Dam was burst in 1961 and that was the greatest ever natural disaster that affected Pune for a while. But it was not blown up but collapsed at the point of greatest impulsive force. The dam is measured to be 1.6 kilometres long and the river on which the dam is built begins from the confluence of the two rivers, Ambi and Mose. The backwaters of the Khadakwasla is around 22 kilometres and it is widened up to 250 to 1000 meters.

The dam possesses 11 radial sluice gates and six irrigation outlets and they flow into two canals. The birth of this dam and the lake is a great history. The man-made lake was built by Captain Fife RE of the British Army who had recommended a high-level reservoir at Khadakwasla in 1863. Thus, the lake has another name as well that is Lake Fife. Famous for one of the most viewed Pune tourist places, this area is beautified with natural serenity and people come to visit the dam for a leisurely, peaceful time. The Sinhagad Fort located near is also one of the best Pune places to visit as it is suitable for cycling

 8) Harihar fort trek

   Harihar Fort is a historic site located in Maharashtra's Nashik district. The Harihar trek is famous among many travel enthusiasts seeking a quick retreat amidst nature. The Harihar Fort trek is blessed with a soothing aura of rich green foliage and panoramic views of breathtaking landscapes that works as a stress buster dose for every trekker.

Soon as you reach the hilltop of Harihar fort, you will be left stunned by the beautiful elongated plateau's astonishing views in the lapse of mother nature. The trek to the Harihar fort is narrow, which depicts a medium level of difficulty.