KOLHAPUR DISTRICT 

"Sprawling on the basin of River
Panchganga, the city of Kolhapur
serves as a home to the temple of
Hindu goddess Mahalakshmi. The
city is famed for its specialisation in
Kolhapuri Chappal, delectable gur or jaggery, mouthwatering cuisine and much
more."

FAMOUS FOR

Rendering to the Hindu myth, the city got its name after the demon Kolhasura, who was slayed by the Goddess Mahalakshmi to salvage people from his atrocities. However, the demon's last wish to the goddess was to name the town after him, which was duly honored. Often touted as the lesser visited city in Maharashtra's otherwise bubbling hill stations and tourist destinations. Kolhapur serves as the halt-point for visiting other places in the region. Nestled peacefully in the lap of the Sahyadri Hills, Kolhapur is popularly known as the "city of palaces and gardens".

This historic city is now an important
industrial hub with the production of
specialised textile products and artifacts.
Kolhapur is renowned for its footwear,
jewellery, art and education. Kolhapuri saaz
is a specialised ornament made in this place.
The city is also home to the Marathi film
industry. Panhala Fort, Mahalakshmi
Temple, Rankala Lake and the Town Hall
Museum are some of the must-visit places
in the city. The area around Mahalakshmi
Temple retains its old world charm. The Old
Palace is a traffic-free zone and be accessed by a monumental gateway. The best time to visit Kolhapur is in August, when the city plays host to the Hindu festival of Naag Panchami. The celebrations are organised in tandem with the ones held in Pune. Ganesh Chaturthi and Navratri are also celebrated with much fanfare and fervour here. When visiting Kohlapur, do take out time for neighbouring places of Mumbai, Pune and
Goa.

WHAT TO SEE 

1) Dream World and fun Water Park :

    kasaba Bawada Road, Raman Mala,
Kolhapur, Maharashtra 416003

Head to this place and let loose the child in
you with the crazy, awesome rides! Situated in Kohlapur, the Dreamworld Fun Water Park,Maharashtra offers you an entertaining and joyful experience. From games, dragon rides, and horse riding to family rides, you can pick your favourite to further your enthusiasm. The main attraction of this amusement park is the 'wave pool', where you can experience how it feels like to dance in the rain. Also, there is a special Play Park in Dreamworld Fun  Water Park, where kids and little champs can have a good time.

2)  Mahalakshmi Temple: 
      Shiv Prabhu Nagar, Survey Nagar,
Kolhapur, Maharashtra 416007

 The Mahalakshmi Temple located in
Kolhapur is among the top 18 Maha Shakti
Peethas listed in various Hindu scriptures.
The temple is of special religious
significance being one of the six places
where it is believed that one can either
obtain salvation from desires or have them
fulfilled. It is believed that Mahalakshmi and Vishnu reside in this area. The idols and the temple architecture suggests that the temple was built during the Chalukyan
period (550 ADEto 660 ADE). The original
temple was destroyed during an earthquake in the 8th century, the ruins of which can still be seen around the present structure. Apart from the primary deity, the temple complex has shrines dedicate to
Mahasaraswati, Ganesha, Shiva and Vishnu
(in his incarnation of a boar carrying mother Earth).The present structure was built and expanded over the course of many centuries and kingdoms (from Shilaharas to Marathas), as seen from the various architectural styles seen within the temple complex.

3) New Palace :
    Bahvani Mandap-Kasaba Bavda
Road, Kolhapur, Maharashtra

One of the major attractions of the town,
the New Palace is a residence cum museum dedicated to the memories of 'The Great Lokraja Shahuji Maharaj'. It is known for its architecture and grand interiors. The museum has weapons, clothes and jewelery and is a great place to re-visit the past.

4) Panhala Fort :
     Panhala Fort, Panhala, Maharashtra 416201

The Panhala Fort lies 20 km away from the main city of Kolhapur, situated at its north-west. This fort holds its position amongst the most massive location in the country and is the largest one in the Deccan region. It was built in a strategic position where a major trade route ran within Maharashtra from Bijapur to the coasts of Arabian Sea. This place is not only a must-visit for the people who love exploring historic locations but also for those who love to trek.

Looking over the green slopes of Sahyadri, it has around 7 kilometres of fortifications along with full proof protection guaranteed by three double-walled gates which are humongous in size. The entire stretch of Panhala Fort is dotted with parapets, ramparts, and bastions and styled with motifs of different dynasties that ruled over the fort - the Marathas, Bahamas, Mughals and so on. The old Panhala Fort was founded in the late 12th century by Raja Bhoja. It was constructed during the period 1178-1209 AD to be later modified by the Marathas. The Indo-Islamic style fort is famously known for being residences to the great Maratha ruler Shivaji and the Queen Regent of Kolhapur - Tarabai.

5)  Jyotiba Temple: 
      Shree Jyotirling Devasthan Wadi Ratnagiri, Tahsil- Panhala, Dist- Kolhapur

Jyotiba Temple is one of the twelve Jyotirlingas that was built in 1730 on a hill at a height of 3124 feet above sea level. As per legends, the three gods (Trinity) – Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh – reincarnated as Jyotiba to kill demons Ratnasur and Raktabhoj that were terrorising locals.

Prior to the construction of the present-day temple by Maharaja Ranoji Shinde, the original shrine – known as Kedareshwar Temple – was erected at the site by a devotee Navji Saya. There are two more shrines within the premises – one built by Malji Nilam Panhalkar in 1780 and other by Daulat Rao Shinde in 1808. Although scores of devotees visit the temple throughout the year, the footfall increases manifold during the annual fairs celebrated on Chaitra Poornima and Vaisakha Poornima.

6) Rankala Lake:
     Rankala Lake, Hari Om Nagar,    Kolhapur, 416012

One of the best places to relax with friends and family is the beautiful Rankala Lake that is often referred to as Rankala Chowpatty and Marine Drive of Kolhapur because of the resemblance; food vendors selling tasty snacks, a pathway for a stroll, gardens, horse riding and boating facilities, etc. Many believe that this lake near the statue of Nandi was constructed by Maharaja Shri Shahu Chhatrapati of Kolhapur, while others believe that the lake was formed naturally when the stone quarry got submerged by underground water after an earthquake. The Rankabhairav Temple also got submerged at the centre of the lake, and probably this is why the lake was named Rankala.